Cool.
Thank you.
Thanks so much for coming.
Hi.
I'm Mary.
I'm here all the way from Orangery land, so-
called Melbourne, Australia.
I'm one of the creators of Roomy.
That's an at-proto-based group chat app for communities.
I'm a guest here on this beautiful land which is un
ceded ancestral territory of Musqueam people.
I want to extend my respect to them and to all indigenous
people around the world who are protecting life from life and communal
cultures on this planet against colonial destruction.
I guess if I had to sum up what I really want
to say, it's that communities are critically important and poorly understood
and most of our tech is very individual-oriented and that understanding
how communities work, especially the role of organisers and in particular
when that community is about cooperating and coordinating to achieve something.
If we can understand that, we can better understand how social systems
change more broadly.
And with that, I also just want to thank the organisers
of this conference for bringing this event together.
It's a massive job.
I also personally really need to acknowledge this book which has just
like had a really enormous impact on my thinking.
It draws on a lot of different thinkers on the topic of
civilizational transition away from our capitalist, colonial, developmentalist, extract
ive society and crisis.
It draws on critical thought and practice across disciplines and particularly from
indigenous and other communal cultures in the global south and especially in
Latin America with the goal of articulating an approach for design.
And by design, I mean if we need a civilizational
transition, what are we transitioning to?
Who gets to decide?
If our current civilisation is one that systematically destroys communal cultures,
how can we design one with the conditions for communal life to
flourish and where cultures can practice the design of themselves?
That's my North Star.
Roomie is what we've been working on.
It's a tool for communities to chat, stay connected, work on
things together.
When I first got involved, I wasn't necessarily thinking that another
chat app was what communities really need right now.
But one of my co-founders, Ellen, had written up this
idea that I found compelling, which is that group chat is minimum
viable community.
Or in other words, chat can be the basic foundation for communities
to connect online.
There are so many things that we could and should be building,
but chat is where we start.
Anyone with internet access is familiar at some level with the UX
metaphor of the UX metaphor of a chat room to mean a
specific context for communication between specific people.
You can absolutely do community in a chat room.
My partner and I had a baby in 2021 and at the
time we weren't, we weren't close with any other queer
parents.
And before I go on, I couldn't be here without my
partner holding the floor while I'm away.
So, thank you, Asia and all the carers who make our
connection here possible.
Becoming a parent can be isolating in a similar way to
how coming out as queer can be isolating.
And it was scary.
But people put us in touch with other friends in the community
having kids and we started a signal group chat that has honestly
been a lifeline sometimes.
We try to practice mutual aid and show up for each other.
We organize to bring meals when someone just gave birth or is
unwell.
We share advice and emotional support.
It's just a group chat.
But that shared context lets us do community.
It's simple, but it's precious.
What happens when the needs of communities get more complex?
My drawings are a bit messed up.
Six years ago, my friends got me interested in a project.
They wanted to make a website with a calendar for activists and
community organizers.
We'll all just keep it updated each week and with whatever
we're seeing out in the world.
And I didn't really know how to make web apps at
the time.
But somehow that didn't stop me from saying, what if we
made a web app?
What if we gave organizers the tools to publish what they're
doing?
And we created a map of all the different parts of our
entire social movement.
And create new ways for people to connect with existing groups and
for different groups to work together and share resources all around the
world.
I guess you could say that at the time, I didn't
really understand the value of taking small steps.
We absolutely should have started by just manually updating a calendar.
Fast forward five years and I, by total chance,
stumble across these guys, Ellen and Ziklag.
And they had this old motto, find the others.
We had both independently spent the last few years trying to build
community scale social apps using matrix protocol.
Given up on that.
And started on a local first web publishing app.
We both had strong visions for what tech that puts users and
communities first should look like.
And we had both learned the hard way, the importance of taking
small steps.
We were both thinking about how collective resource sharing can defeat monopoly
network effects.
We were both wondering what gets us in good loops to create
good systems.
And we happened to live in Melbourne, Oslo, Arkansas.
We met in a group chat.
Sorry, there's more on the slide.
We found each other in a group chat.
The hypothesis that chat is minimum viable community is what led the
three of us and the whole crew of other people to spend
the last year focused on Roomie.
So what happens when the needs of communities get more complex?
Like I said before, the core of a chat room is shared
context.
Add more voices into the mix and we start to lose track
of context.
And we've seen that organizing into channels and threads works.
So these are in Roomie available to use now.
We call the big shared community context a space.
If you haven't checked it out, this is the atmosphere conf
Roomie space.
So channels are on the side and they're in categories.
If you open a channel, you can see recent threads.
We have reactions, replies, chat stuff.
And if you're an admin, you can move messages into a
thread.
If you want to retroactively introduce some more structure and organization.
Roomie is not the first open source group chat app that
has these features.
And there's still a lot of rough edges.
But the difference is that I -- the difference is that Roomie
is an @proto app.
With this caveat, messages aren't on the PDS because we
want to launch private spaces ASAP.
They live on our equivalent of a PDS called leaf.
It has a DID you can control to adversarially migrate
it to your own self-hosted leaf server.
The data is formatted just like app proto records and you
can build an alternative client too.
Auth is just an app proto service token.
All of which is to say we care about credible exit and
interop.
And with permission spaces on the horizon, we're going to keep
working to make interop as easy as possible.
And we're really excited about what that's going to unlock.
Because users deserve easy access to their data on whatever app they
want.
A lot of communities currently have a home on Discord, including us,
when we're working on this.
Most communities want to try out and progressively move to using Room
ie without losing users in the process.
So, I built a Discord Roomie bridge this year.
And we started contacting the first few communities to test it out.
This is the Roomie space.
Showing Roomie messages.
Interwoven with bridged Discord messages.
You can see them with a little badge.
So, you can be on either side of the platform and just
communicate like normal.
You might have also noticed that we're bridging in messages
from the stream place chat.
So, when the stream ends for this talk, the chat in the
stream should also appear in Roomie.
AtProto makes that easy.
Tom Scanlan, who's building OpenMeet, also built this
AtProto calendar viewer into Roomie.
So, these are standard, like, community.
lexicon events for the conference.
They're published by atmosphereconf.
org.
It's the same events you can see on the Conf website
and other calendar viewers, like Flowbits, atmo.
rsvp.
Shout out to Flowbit, who's, like, done heaps of
work on Roomie as well.
Like, incredible UI work.
We could take this so much further.
But that's just a taste of what we've been building
so far with Roomie.
Less control to apps means users are more free and we can
build cool stuff.
The whole point of social software is interconnecting.
AtProto lets us do that while meaningfully giving more
control to users and, to some extent, communities.
At the start of this talk, I said, communities are critically important
and poorly understood, but most of our tech is made with individuals
in mind.
AtProto was designed for big world social networking, where individuals
publish data for broadcasting across the whole network to be aggregated
and consumed.
Just a name and shame.
But communities need to be somewhat separate, protected from the big world
to really flourish.
Like I said before, the essence of a chat room is shared
context.
When we can reliably establish shared context, shared norms, we can speak
more freely, trust each other more easily, and get more stuff done
together.
Okay, so, I mean, we live in an individualising, often isolating
world.
And sometimes it feels like there is no alternative, nothing outside of
that.
How do we enter the communal?
What happens in the inter-tidal zone between the big world
and the protected space?
The late union organiser, Jane McAulvey, made some
useful distinctions for the different levels of agency in collective action.
You can donate.
You could be advocating for an issue.
You can be mobilising people, and mobilising means you don
't just want to inform people.
You want other people to get up and do something.
And when I think about how broadcast-based social media can help
social movements, I think about mobilising.
You can mobilise a car, but what good is that if
you don't know where you're going to drive it?
So, collectivity is made by organisers.
Organising is about empowering other people to have agency within the
frame of your shared work or shared problem.
It's an evergreen meme.
Union organising is all about building collective people power.
Or fish power.
Each of us on our own might have pretty limited leverage in
whatever problem we're facing.
But when a lot of us, with our limited leverage, choose to
cooperate, we can collectively get big leverage.
That's the theory of change.
Organisers need tools that help communities create, refine, and communicate
an effective mental model of the system that they're trying to
gain leverage in.
We want Rumi to be that tool, where it's not
just about keeping the chat going, but reflexively going back through
the chat to strip out the noise and keep the key insights.
Putting messages into threads, letting threads become the seeds for refined documents,
potentially even publishing those documents for wider distribution.
Maybe sharing the key insights with other groups, other communities to coordinate
and to find the others.
The public at Proto Social Graph can really help us with
these points of interconnection.
So, the rest of this talk is like a vision board.
For what comes next.
One thing we want to build is a bit like web rings
between communities.
Like, honestly, bring this back.
Web rings are a really cute practice back from the web 1.
0 days.
People would form a network of personal sites by linking to each
other in a ring.
So, you keep clicking next and you loop around back to the
same site.
For us, I'm not sure if it should be in a
ring, but we do really want to see how distinct communities that
are aligned in some way can interconnect without having to form a
hierarchy.
So, I'm going to tell a story.
About a decade ago, I got involved in an environmental campaign called
Stop Adani.
Adani is a mining company that was trying to build the
biggest coal mine in the southern hemisphere.
And our government was funding them to do it.
I just hated the total inaction on climate change and needed
to do something about it.
So, this ended up being my introduction to direct action, which is
where you go and put your body on the line, trying to
stand directly in the way of something that a just society wouldn
't tolerate.
When I got up to the camp, everyone was practicing consensus-based
decision-making with this idea that we don't pressure or co
erce anyone to be part of an action.
We're working towards collective consent for whatever we do.
I started getting skilled up in facilitating meetings to learn how to
make that happen with a big group of people efficiently.
And being part of this practice really changed me.
I also learned that we had a few strategic goals.
But our main focus was to show investors that the project was
unreliable.
To do that, we needed to identify choke points in their system
and their process and work out ways to exploit them and blow
out their costs while minimizing our own.
I've participated to different degrees in a lot of actions and
campaigns since then with ups and downs.
But I think that campaign was where I really got a sense
of how much is involved to organize on that scale.
Ultimately, the mine did go ahead, but it was only a sixth
of the scale that they'd proposed.
And the primary reason is they couldn't attract the capital.
So this is a review of the secondary targets to the campaign,
including financiers and how many of them publicly ruled out supporting
the mine.
In the commons analysis in 2022, the mine had been delayed
by nine years.
And the primary tactic they identified used by groups active in the
campaign was information sharing.
So I came in to stop Adani in a relatively brief
and limited capacity.
And I learned that what we were doing was just a small
part of a much bigger system.
There were non-profits doing campaign research, strategic litigation.
There was volunteer community groups doing public campaigning.
There was a Wangan and Jagalingu traditional owners group
opposing the mine.
We had links with groups based in student unions around the country.
And all of these were like different communities that were all coordinating
with each other and supporting each other with no hierarchy.
I only got a little sense of how much overhead went into
that coordination.
But I'm going to say it was a lot of very
thankless admin that is also critical organizing work.
But I hope with this example, you can imagine a future or
a version of this reality where you could have the Brisbane chapter
of the non-profit, which is all volunteers, and the Sydney chapter,
and the funded national group, and a group for lawyers against Ad
ani, the traditional owners group, and the direct action camp, probably being
pretty quiet until we get end-to-end encryption.
And these are all autonomous community spaces accessed with Rumi or
whatever client makes sense.
And none of them have to own each other, but they can
express something about the relationship with each other in their UI and
their access control settings.
All of these groups want and need to be autonomous, and they
also want and need to collaborate.
The current solutions force us to choose between the two.
So, to be clear, I'm not just trying to say hierarchy
is bad.
Big communities often naturally have concentric rings of values and mission
alignment, experience, capacity to lead and act as an organizer, and that
's why we see hierarchical role-based moderation, for example, working
pretty well for a lot of online communities.
It shouldn't necessarily be the default.
Yesterday, Blaine mentioned Nathan Schneider's concept of implicit feud
alism, and my thinking is that we can avoid that by
creating tools that empower users to step into governance, into organizing.
If people know Eleanor Ostrom, Governing the Commons,
one of my key takeaways from that was the ability to participate
in modifying rules is one of the principles of successful commons
governance.
In apps like Rumi, where a space can have many channels
or other structures, some of them might be private or have different
access boundaries.
That structure can become complex in a way that's culturally integral.
We don't want that structure bound to any one app, so
I think that's just like something to think about as we
move into permissioned spaces world.
How can we make governance structures interoperable?
Just to keep expanding the vision board, maybe there are
some citizen scientists using a separate app on Atproto where
you can record observations of endangered species.
And at the same time, the lawyers against Adani are trying
to mount an environmental regulation case against the mine, and they have
a feed set up where they can track observations of the black-
throated finch, the yakka skink, the ornament
al snake, within the specific region affected by the mine.
And they're all showing up automatically in their space as usable
evidence.
The UI for rendering that data could be a plugin, someone published
on Atproto, maybe like a web tile or an in
lay component, and the lawyers can choose how they want it rendered.
Soon there's a new space for organising citizen scientists in
the area to all travel out to the field together, specifically to
gather observations to benefit the legal case.
So open social means the opportunities for people everywhere to coordinate and
get aligned on things we care about can just explode.
I wanted to talk about a climate-related campaign because the climate
movement is full of really smart people who have gotten good at
system modelling.
Weather systems, sure.
Ecologies, yes.
But also working out how to coordinate and align incentives between really
diverse actors, states, market actors, non-profits, community groups around the whole
world.
What we're doing with the open social web is really similar
in a lot of ways.
Monopoly control of global communications infrastructure is also a planetary problem.
And we've been stuck in reinforcing feedback loops causing so much
destruction.
Consider the effort with which fossil fuel companies have tried to prevent
increasingly cheap renewable energy from entering the market and cutting into their
profits.
Like renewable energy, the benefits of everyone having control over their data
will be obvious to everyone once you break out of the monopoly
feedback loop.
And there's no question that we will.
As I finish up, I just want to come back to this
question from Designs for the Pluriverse.
What does it mean to design a civilisation in which communal
life can flourish and communities can practise the design of themselves?
The author argues that the concept of autonomy, like self-determination,
is a keystone in decolonial Latin American thought that
could shape how we answer that question.
He proposes a framework called autonomous design.
I'd like to go into it more, but I'm going
to just wrap up now.
But I'd love to talk about this with anyone.
This idea that communities are living systems, basically.
They produce themselves, and the more that they can reliably produce themselves
within the assurance of the holdfast, like Erin said, the better
they can learn and adapt.
If we, as technologists, give communities tools to protect themselves against
assault, but also to learn and adapt to the broader environment, we
cultivate the conditions for a world where many worlds can fit.
We're working on really enormous, important, and very particular problems here,
and it can be hard, but we are so much more powerful
together.
So let's find each other.
Thank you.
Thank you so much, Mary.
That was a beautiful talk.
We have some time for questions.
Yes.
Oh, sorry, wait.
I must give this to you so they can hear you in
the streaming.
Yeah, so during the pandemic, a lot of us spent a lot
of time on the computer, and there were a lot of musicians
that went to Discord and found new collaborations with each other.
This was really important for me because I didn't really have
local community that partook in the same kind of music that
I liked, so it completely changed my life as an artist.
I know there are some significant technical boundaries with implementing multimedia support,
but do you have any plans for VC in the future?
Because I feel like that would unlock a whole new community of
other people that communicate via sonics where words don't really
serve the same purpose.
I agree it's a really important problem.
It's not at the center of what we're trying to
do right now.
And I guess I'm hoping to see that we can, as
a community, come up with solutions for this and share resources around
this because, yeah, I think these are tools that we need and
it makes sense to have it on protocol.
Hopefully we can get there.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Thanks for the inspiring
talk.
You mentioned in passing this kind of aspiration to resist monopolies
through cooperative sort of federation, and I wonder if you had
any more thoughts on like, yeah, just expanding on that a little
and where your head's at with that.
I think, yeah, I guess like it's interesting, like what in
one of Paul's essays, like talking about lexicons as
a tool for negotiating, like the governance of like how interoper
ability works.
And yeah, like I feel like these kind of emerging organizations like
lexicon community, like are going to become more and more
important because to me, like our biggest shared resource is the kind
of shared data on the protocol.
And so we could end up in a place where everyone's
trying to keep their cards close to their chest to gain leverage
and I guess the point that I really wanted to make is
that we're all small fish and there are some really big
sharks and we need to destroy that world.
We need to like move way past that world, you know, we
need to like move way past that world, you know, so we
only do that by working together, by sharing our resources, this is
like the theory of change of like cooperative businesses.
So yeah, I think like community efforts to like really actively make
space to coordinate with each other.
Like that's a social work we need to do.
Thank you so much, Mary.
I'd like to invite Victoria up here.
Oh, yes, please.
A round of applause.
Thank you.